---
status: published
tags:
  - feminism
title: A Blockchain App for Sexual Consent is Useless
---

With the recent allegations of sexual assault by Asiz Ansari and the
recent popularity of blockchain currencies like Bitcoin, there have been
some proposals put forth to prevent false allegations of sexual assault
through a cryptographically signed contract which details what the
participating parties consent to during sex. This essay is an
exploration of how an app for entering into contracts for sexual consent
does not prevent false allegations, and in fact increases the risk for
a party concerned about being assaulted.

Disclaimer: This exploration makes no judgement on the frequency and
importance of false allegations of sexual assault. The rate of false
allegations are infinitesimal compared to the rate of sexual assaults
(both reported and unreported). The primary victims of false allegations
of sexual assault are historically heterosexual men, who have previously
had little to fear from sex.  The idea that we must go through all
possible solutions to ensure that heterosexual men continue to have
nothing to fear from sex is ludicrous, and this essay demonstrates how
one solution will do nothing to solve anything.

Let's create an app:

The app lets two people enter into a contract for a performance. The app
provides proof that both parties agree to the performance, and
a detailed explanation of the performance agreed-to. No incentive or
compensation can be given for the performance (besides, perhaps, some
well-earned applause). Only the two parties will be witness to the
performance: There can be no recordings or spectators, and the
performance itself leaves no evidence of its completion except in the
memory of the parties involved.

We are assuming:

* The app is perfectly secure against intrusion from a third party. The
  regular occurrence of high-profile Internet security breaches (like
  Experian) betrays this.
* The app is built by a team with good intentions and no desire to
  monetize the resulting data, or the app is built to secure the data
  from internal malicious actors (this could be part of the security
  bit)
* The app can perfectly authenticate a user with a legal name and an
  address at which legal process can be served.  If any of this is not
  true, there is effectively no consequence to breaching the contract
  and thus no reason to trust that the contract will be fulfilled

At the end of the performance, both parties have a choice to make: Did
the other party breach the contract?

In a perfect scenario, the performance is exactly as both parties agreed
to and neither party objects. In this scenario, the contract has
achieved only one thing: A conversation about the expectations for the
performance. This is important, but contracts also exist in order to
detail what happens when the expectations are not met. In these cases,
under these restrictions, the existence of the contract does not
actually solve any problem.

If Alice asks Bob to read to her the novel Great Expectations, and Bob
reads A Tale of Two Cities instead, the existence of the contract does
not strengthen Alice's claim that Bob did not follow the contract: Bob
can claim he read the correct book, and produce a copy of it proving he
could read it. Alice's lack of recollection of any part of Great
Expectations does not prove her good faith.

If Alice lies, says Bob read the wrong book, the existence of the
contract does not make Bob's case any easier to defend. Bob cannot force
Alice to recall specific plot details of the book he read, and proving
that he has a copy of the correct book and has read it does nothing to
Alice's claim that he did not read the book to her.

So, the nature and existence of the contract doesn't actually improve
anything.  There's no benefit to Bob to sign the contract, and there is
increased risk: If Alice decides to claim Bob owes her a performance,
she can point to the contract to prove that there was an agreement. So,
whether or not Bob intends to perform, there is no benefit to Bob to
sign the contract. If Bob has no reason to sign the contract, Alice will
not get her performance. So, Alice has no reason to force Bob to sign
a contract.

The only result of this scenario is that no performances will ever
happen, as nobody has any reason to perform.

When applied to the specific scenario of sex, we have even more
problems. We are ignoring that this app is now potentially enabling
/ soliciting prostitution, and we will continue with the idea that one
party is consenting to perform for another (despite how demeaning that
is, and despite how many people believe that's how sex works).

Since sexual consent is an active process, the app can be used at any
time to modify the parameters of the performance (consent to something
more or revoke consent). This opens up more attack vectors: Deny the
user access to the app, and you can continue doing something they no
longer consent to. Technical means for addressing this problem
(dead-man's switch in the app) do not prevent this violation of consent
from happening (though may prevent it from continuing in perpetuity).

The dead-man's switch opens up more problems:

1. A user temporarily and innocently loses access to the app. Now the
app thinks the user is being assaulted. Any automated remedies
(dispatching a security force) would lead to both hilarious and tragic
consequences.
2. A user intentionally fails a security check-in. They now have
leverage for a breach-of-contract from the other user.

The fluid nature of sexual consent also opens up another vector for
"breach of contract": User revokes consent after doing something, then
claims it happened after they revoked consent, even if it happened
before consent was revoked.  There's evidence it happened, but the app
thinks it was both consented to and later not consented to. The app does
not know when the act occurred, and so cannot help to resolve the issue.
Technical solutions for this would be amusing, but not useful.

The app complicates the encounter while creating more risk for someone
who worries that their consent will be violated. Since, presently, women
are more afraid of sexual assault by men than men are from women, this
app will never be used by them. So, it means any man interested in
having sex with a woman will not be able to use the app.
